Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lobs, and
today I'm joined for a second time by Dr.
Matthew McManus. Uh, Last time we talked about his
book, The Political Theory of Liberal Socialism, and I
will be leaving a link to that in the
description of this. This interview and today we're going
to talk about his pieces, uh, The Right When
You Stupid, which was published on liberal Currents, and
Steven Pinker doesn't know anything about Marxism, which was
published on Current Affairs. So Doctor McManus, welcome back
to the show. It's always a pleasure to talk
with you.
Yeah, absolutely. Uh, AND for those who are listening,
um, obviously, I'm cheering for Canada in the World
Cup, but it's also nice to see that, uh,
Portugal's been doing pretty well, so.
Yeah Yeah, yeah, yeah, well, let's see how it
goes. I mean, I think that France and Argentina
are doing better than Portugal, at least for, for
the most part, but yeah, let's see. Uh, OK,
so, um, let's, let's first talk about your piece,
The Right Ws You Stupid. So, uh, you talk
a lot about anti-intellectualism and how it's, uh, uh,
associated with the right, at least in North America,
it seems. So isn't the intellectualism something that has
been historically associated with the right, or is it
more of a recent phenomenon?
No, uh, actually, this is one of the things
that I point out, right? Uh, SO it's important
to kind of clarify the trajectory, uh, of Occidental
thought here. Uh, SO what I point out, not
just in this piece, but in my broader work
on the right, is that this impulse that many
leftists have to say that it's common sense to
argue that all people are equal, or that we
should live in a society where all people are
at least civic equals. Uh, THAT'S a very modern
idea, right? Uh, IN some respects, The right isn't
wrong to have this kind of nostalgic view of
the past, uh, because for most of Western history,
it was taken for granted that people were fundamentally
unequal, right? Um, SO just to give a couple
of examples of this, the great quasi-conservative philosopher Leo
Strauss, talking about the work of Aristotle, uh, in
his book, The City of Man, points out that
for Aristotle, it was very clear that human beings
by nature were unequal, uh, and that these natural
inequalities that existed between. Individuals ought to map onto
social inequalities, right? Uh, AND the Canadian political theorist
Charles Taylor in his book Modern Social Imaginaries, uh,
characterizes this as a social imaginary predicated on what
he calls hierarchical complementarity. Uh, BASICALLY, the idea was
that society should be conceived as a pyramid, uh,
where natural superiors were at the top of the
pyramid, but natural inferiors were at the bottom of
the pyramid. Uh, AND of course, it It was
understood by all intelligent, um, figures in antiquity that
every rung of the pyramid needed one another, right?
You can't have a society of uh philosopher kings,
unless you have people who are going to do
the dirty work. Uh, BUT that was by no
means the case that every rung of the pyramid,
uh, consisted of beings of equal rank, uh, or
that everyone possessed equal dignity. Uh, WITH the transition
to modernity, this idea really changed. Uh, NOW, I
want to point out this isn't purely down to
liberalism, and it's certainly not purely down. Socialism, right?
Uh, THERE are many antecedents to this egalitarian, uh,
idea. You can find it, for example, in the
Buddhist tradition, uh, going all the way back to
Ashoka. Uh, MANY like Ntha Nosbaum have pointed out
that stoicism, particularly Seneca stoicism, uh, really foregrounded this
idea of natural equality, at least, right? The idea
that, um, the Roman Emperor and the slave, uh,
even if they were of a different rank in
society, were naturally the equal of one another. And
quite naturally, many conservatives or many uh right-winggers at
least, have pointed out Christianity has a strong egalitarian
core to it, uh, that has been profoundly influential
in the Western world, right? The at least this
idea that, uh, all individuals are equal before the
throne of God. But I do have to give
some credit to liberalism. This is what I talk
about in my book on liberal socialism, uh, because
it was really in the 17th and 18th century,
that this idea of moral equality or the fundamental
equality of all human beings. At least from a
moral standpoint, uh, that gained revolutionary potential. If you
think about things like the English Civil wars, of
course, the American, French, and Haitian revolutions that broke
out, uh, and then, of course, subsequently, the various
revolutions that broke out over the course of the
19th century in continental Europe. Um. Eventually including uh
Portugal, um, many, many decades later. Uh, AND conservatives
responded to this greater push for moral equality, liberalism,
basic rights for all, and of course, participatory government,
uh, with a great deal of shock and anger.
Uh, AND the reason they responded with shock and
anger was because For them, uh, it was simply
to be taken for granted, uh, that society consisted
of beings of different rank, uh, and this has
been long established, uh, in the best philosophy, the
best works of, um, intellectual prestige, uh, that have
been around for a very long time. Uh, A
good book on this is, um, University of Michigan
Press' um, Don Herzog's Poison in the Minds of
the Lower Orders. Uh, AND this is to your
point, by the way, about the rights, um, failing
monopoly, uh, on intellectual prestige. Uh, AND what Hertzog
points out is, if you were to go back
to the Middle Ages, Much like, uh, Aristotle would
spend an anti-egalitarian society, uh, so too would many
Christian philosophers defend, uh, what he called the great
chain of being, uh, that was also supposed to
map on to society or be mapped on by
society. Uh, YOU know, the great chain of being
was basically An argument that nature was a hierarchical
organization, right? There was God at the top, then
angels and archangels, then human beings somewhere around the
middle, and then there were plants, animals, and demons
at the very bottom. And of course, the feudal
system was understood to kind of be an isomorphic
representation of the great chain of being on a
much smaller level, right? Yeah, yeah,
it's, it's the idea of the natural order of
society, right, that you also mentioned in your piece.
Exactly, right. This idea that there's a natural inequality
between different human beings, much as there's a natural
inequality between Different beings generally, uh, in the natural
cosmos set by God. So, you know, the king,
you have the lords, you have the, um, you
know, knights and peasants, and all them kind of
have their rank, uh, assigned to them by God.
Uh, EVERY now and then you're allowed to disrupt
that if the king is really tyrannical, but by
and large, you're supposed to know your place. Uh,
AND Herzog points out that scholastic philosophers. Pretty much
defended this view, uh, not uncritically, um, but in
broad strokes for hundreds and hundreds of years to
provide a lot of legitimation to the feudal system,
what later becomes known as the Austrian regime of
Europe. So, conservatives and reactionary thinkers are genuinely shocked
when And these revolutions break out. Evan Burke says,
you know, uh, now all is to be changed
by this all-conquering empire of light and reason. Uh,
ALL the kind of old ways are to be
blasted apart, and he's really quite apocalyptic about that.
Uh, AND his tone is actually quite moderated next
to somebody like Joseph De Maestro, who sees this
as a truly demonic event. But what do they
do, right? They say, something must have happened, uh,
to disrupt the natural order of things. Uh, AND
when you're faced with this, you really have two
options, right? You can sit there and say, well,
maybe the natural order of things wasn't so natural
after all, right? We can organize society and Very
different ways. Uh, THE kind of a feudal aristocracy
of the Austrian regime is just one of them.
Uh, BUT that option isn't really available to many
conservatives and reactionaries, uh, because it delegitimates, uh, the
social hierarchies that they think are necessary. Um. And
natural, right, to the malfunctioning of any good society.
So what they do instead is they decide to
target intellectuals, uh, amongst others, right? Suggesting that were
it not for these nebbish philosophs and intellectuals and
liberals, uh, spreading their toxic and even demonic, uh,
ideas, then you'd have a contented population that would
still understand the role. That they were meant to
play in society and they wouldn't question it too
much. Uh, AND if you think about this, this
is a very savvy move, uh, on the part
of these conservative critics, uh, because they're able to
divest actually existing societies from blame for the revolution,
right? Um, BECAUSE of course, the liberals are saying
the reason the revolutions are breaking out is because
people are unhappy with the king, they're unhappy with
the aristocracy, etc. And they're relocating blame in the
fact that intellectuals are criticizing the society. So it's
not what the intellectuals are criticizing that's the problem.
It's the fact that intellectuals are criticizing, that's the
big part of the problem.
So we're talking here about the time period around
the American and the French revolutions. Is that it?
Yes, that's right. Um, SO, Just to give two
examples that I bring up in my piece. Uh,
I already mentioned Edmund Burke, and then we'll talk
a little bit about Joseph de Maestro, right? Uh,
SO, Edmund Burke, as is well known, responded to
the French Revolution with Quite apocalyptic anger, right? Uh,
I already mentioned his famous claim that all has
to be changed and swept away by the all-conquering
empire of light and reason. Uh, WHAT'S um less
appreciated is who he blamed for this. Uh, AND
this is one of the reasons why I thought
the French Revolution was so damaging. He understood that
it was not just a kind of um regime
change, revolution, uh, where a couple of people wanted
to replace the king with another king. Uh, IT
was a philosophical revolution, as he understood. Uh, THAT
has its roots in the spread of radical Enlightenment
values, uh, propagated by different Enlightenment philosophers and their
followers, the philosophers, right, these kind of coffeehouse popularizers
of these different ideas. Uh, AND Burke was unrelentingly
critical, uh, of them, uh, insinuating that they speculated
wildly in these kind of metaphysical ways about natural
rights and reorganizing society, uh. And how everyone was
to be free and everyone was to be equal,
and Burke would have none of that, right? He's
very insistent that these kinds of rampant speculations are
only going to be damaging to the cause of
social order that he so cherished. And sometimes this
anti-intellectualism could reach quite a fever pitch. So, around
the time, a little bit earlier, if I recall
correctly, I might be wrong about this though, uh,
of reflections on the revolution in France, he was
talking about um People inquiring into the origins of
civil society, right? Um, HOW did this state emerge,
how did that state emerge with its given social
authorities? Uh, AND he says, it's a really bad
thing when people spend too much time inquiring into
the origins of their state. Uh, AND the reason
he said is very clearly, clear, very clear, right?
Uh, WHEN people spend a lot of time inquiring
into the origins of the state, uh, what you
do is desublimate the authorities that make up that
state, uh, and they're all too human and even
criminal and often violent origins become exposed, right? Um,
AND this is, of course, what many of the,
um, revolutionaries would do, right? Thomas Paine would sit
there and say, uh, People hold the English monarchy
up on a pedestal and suggest that it's some
kind of divinely ordained institution. Uh, REALLY, what ended
up happening is William the Conqueror sailed across the
English Channel in 1066 with a band of mostly
French, uh, mercenaries. Uh, HE killed the legitimate king
of England, uh, at the time, Harold Godwinson, uh,
murdered and butchered his way. Across England, uh, and
then everybody just decided, OK, well, he's king now.
Uh, AND, you know, Payne's point is, when you
understand that that's the origin of the English monarchy,
starts to look a lot less impressive and a
lot less legitimate. So Burke didn't want people inquiring
too deeply, uh, into these things. Uh, AND elsewhere
in the book, Reflection on the Revolution in France,
he actually suggests that, um, When man is gonna
be put over man, uh, as the better character
always should, what you want are social institutions that
will ascribe sublime properties onto existing authorities. You really
want to convince people that God wants the world
ordered in this way, right? Um, WHICH is where,
you know, these ideas of divine right and Providence,
etc. BECOME important. And the reason is pretty obvious,
right? Uh, Burke says, look, uh, if you think
that Louis the 16th, King of France is just
another man, uh, who happened to wind up on
the throne of France because it happenstance. You might
ask yourself why you should just obey any other
man, right? But if you think that Louis the
16th, uh, is ordained by God to sit on
that throne, uh, or let alone that he is
the sun King, uh, you know, the man of
destiny, you're much more likely to be willing to
submit to him and obey his rule. Uh, SO,
Burke says you always want social institutions, particularly religious
institutions, to propagate this idea, uh, that, um, Providence
requires that these people be in charge. Initially enough,
he characterizes these at another point as pleasing illusions,
right? So he's quite aware of the fact that
it might not actually be true, uh, that Providence
or God requires that social authority be instituted in
this way. Uh, BUT it's better that we treat
them, uh, as if they are, uh, because again,
if people don't treat them like they are, they're
far more likely to rebel against them and to
engage in speculative exercises, uh, fostered by intellectuals, encouraging
people to change.
So, so I mean it's very interesting because I
mean if that's the case then they are willing,
or I mean not maybe not willing, but perhaps
at a certain point they even admit that the
progressives might be right or telling the truth, but
It's just that they don't think that telling people
things or presenting things as they are to the
general population is good because they want to make
an argument for the preservation of social cohesion and
social organization, is that it?
Yeah, that's absolutely right. I mean, at one point
in reflections on the revolution in France, uh, when
he's talking about pleasing illusions, he says, look, this
all conquering empire of light and reason, uh, wants
to strip away, uh, all the kind of super
added imagery and ideas that we've attached to people
in offices of importance, uh, and imply that a
king is just a man, uh, a man is
just an animal, uh, and not even a particularly
dignified animal at that. Uh, AND Burke doesn't deny.
THAT because it's true, right? You know, the reality
is a king is just a man and any
man is just an animal, uh, and that might
lead you to ask why it is that this
particular ape, uh, you know, naked ape, as it
were, uh, should have such sovereignty, uh, over all
the rest of you. Uh, BUT Burt, I wouldn't
say that he would claim that the kind of,
um, providential or sublime ideas that he attaches to
them are untrue. They're untrue from a rationalistic perspective,
uh, and they're untrue if you inquire. INTELLECTUALLY too
deeply into them. And this is one of his
points, right? They are useful, effectual truths. Uh, THEY'RE
valuable if you treat them as true, even if
you can't necessarily prove that, because they're useful and
holding society together as a kind of social glue.
And this point becomes even more clear and Joseph
De Maestro, the other figure that I talked about
at the beginning, uh, of the kind of modern
period. So, Burke was a relatively Moderate conservative, uh,
within certain kind of parameters. Um, OTHERS like Richard
Borka pointed out that actually he held some quite
extreme views, especially near the end of his life.
Uh, WE don't need to get into that, but
I kind of pushed back against the idea that
he was just always for a kind of moderate,
sensible, prudential politics. Uh, BUT Joseph Demeia, nobody's ever
made that accusation or made that claim, right? Uh,
HE is a full-throated reactionary, uh, characterized as the
French Revolutionary, and I quote as a. Panic event,
uh, that is without precedence in the world. Uh,
BUT throughout his work, he also, like Burke says
that one of the main problems with the French
Revolution is it was very much an intellectually inspired
revolution, right? You had these middle class intellectuals and
philosophs and Rousseau, uh, who talked about how man
is free, born free, and everywhere he is in
chains. Can't have that, right? Uh, AND Joseph de
Maestro says at various points, uh, well, this This
goes to show you why it's very, very problematic
to allow people the freedom to indulge in any
kind of intellectual inquiry or any kind of critical
inquiry that they want. Uh, AND he actually makes
a fairly subtle point here. So I'm not dismissing
it as just anti-intellectualism, because I think to a
certain extent, he's right about this. He says, look,
uh, the Enlightenment rationalists imagine that if you allow
everyone to critically reason about society independently. Uh, WITHOUT
reference to any kind of pre-existing authorities, or at
least without deference to any pre-existing epistemic authorities, uh,
then together we're gonna arrive at the best and
most rational way of organizing society, right? Uh, THIS
is the kind of claim that people like Kent
would make, for example, right? You know, everyone's rational
and everybody will will the moral law if you
give them much time, and they don't bias themselves,
putting it crudely. Uh, AND debater says that's not
true, right? If you allow everyone, especially. Intellectuals, the
freedom to endlessly criticize authority, uh, and to try
to envision new and more legitimate kinds of authorities.
They're not going to reach some kind of consensus
on things. Uh, WHAT they're going to do is
corrode existing authorities, and every one of them is
going to come up with their own pet project
about what should replace it, right? Uh, YOU know,
the socialists would imagine, well, imagine we should have
a socialist society. The Bolsheviks will say we should
have a communist society. Kamala Harris will say, you
know, we should offer. People, a first-time homeowners tax,
uh, and that'll revolutionize everything. You get the idea,
right? Uh, SO Demeestro says, this is why we
should not allow people the freedom to intellectually criticize
existing societies. All it's going to do is dissolve
the basis of society, which is deference to authority
or allegiance to authority, as Roger Scruton will put
it sometimes. Uh, AND he says this is why
you want people. To be, and I quote, surrounded
by dogmas, uh, from the moment they're born. Uh,
WHEN a person comes into this world, he should
have every opinion he is ever going to have
ready-made for him, uh, and he should treat the
opinions that are ready-made for him, uh, as if
they are absolute sacred truths. Uh, AND much like
Burke, he says, you need institutions to be there
over the course of life, particularly the church, to
continuously reinforce. Uh, THIS idea. Uh, AND from the
maestra's perspective, this is the only way you're going
to have a solid enduring authority. This kind of
combination of, um, what's sometimes called throne and altar
politics. Uh, AND it's hard to emphasize just how
anti-intellectual an idea this is, of course, right? You
know, this idea that people are not gonna think
too much, they're gonna be dogmatic, self-consciously, you know,
he thinks, um, and they're gonna have every opinion
ready-made for them, uh, it's kind of one of
the most Interesting calls to shut down discussion, uh,
that you're gonna find in the history of Western
philosophy.
Do you think that, I mean, at least some
of these ideas that these conservative thinkers you're referring
to come up with are at least to some
extent the ruling class coming up with sort of
post hoc justifications for the societal order that benefits
them.
I think we have to be careful here because
what's interesting, particularly about Burke, uh, is Burke is
a much more representative conservative figure in that he's
certainly speaking for the ruling classes, right? Uh, AND
he sometimes is quite self-conscious about this. Uh, AFTER
reflections on the revolution in France, he was actually
quite irritated, uh, that the British aristocracy didn't show
him enough appreciation, given all the services that he
had rendered for them. Uh, BUT Burke himself was
a middle-class individual, uh, who was something of a
social striver, right? Uh, Kind of risen through the
ranks of the English aristocracy to occupy a position
of relative preeminence, uh, but not, you know, complete
preeminence, which was part of the problem. Uh, AND
Joseph De Maestra came from a somewhat more auspicious
background, right? He was part of the lower mobility.
Uh, AND initially in his life, he had supported
some very moderate reforms that would have allowed the
lower mobility to have more of a say in
the ASM regime, uh, which you can characterize as
self-serving, and I would, right? Uh. And then he
later on becomes just completely uh dogmatic, right? Uh,
BUT, you know, what's I think is interesting about
both of these figures is one of the reasons
they're so insightful on this point, uh, is because
they have a better appreciation for what the revolutionaries
are doing and the philosophical dimension of these revolutions,
uh, than a lot of the more hoary kind
of, um, conservative figures who might have been working
at the time, uh, who still think that you
can appeal to Aristotle and Scholas. AND you're gonna
convince the now literate middle classes, uh, to just
kind of shut up, uh, and go back to
doing their job. Uh, Burke and Demeester are very
aware that these revolutions are the product of a
fundamental change in how the world is being conceived
as more and more people become literate, as more
and more people become educated, and as more and
more people consequently start to think of themselves as
active citizens rather than passive subjects. Uh, AND what
they want, therefore, is to develop new ways, uh.
Trying to suggest that people need to once more
kind of resign themselves or accept the world into
which they are born uncritically. Uh, BUT I'm not
sure that they would have been quite as original
and thoughtful as they were on this point, uh,
if they were man or born, uh, to the
upper echelons of the ruling class. It's the fact
that they had kind of 1 ft in what
they were criticizing and could sometimes even appreciate and
admire or they stand in awe of what they
were criticizing that gave their criticisms their power.
Yes, but, but I mean, at least even if
indirectly these kinds of narrow conservative narrative serve the
interests of the upper classes.
Oh, OK, well if that's what you're talking about
just in this kind of instrumental term, then without
a doubt, right? I mean, again, you don't need
to speculate. The upper, the upper aristocracy of Great
Britain, uh, initially lauded Burke, uh, saying that he
had done a service to gentlemen all across Europe,
uh, by which they mean the aristocracy, uh, through
publishing, reflections on the revolution, France, and other works
critical of the French Revolution. Uh, Joseph de Maestra
didn't initially receive quite as many, uh, shall we
say, laudits, um, because, um, Napoleon came to power
and he was kind of chased across Europe. Uh,
BUT even he was able to kind of make
it to, um, Russia for a long time, where
he wrote some of his most famous works, uh,
and was by and large treated very respectfully by
the ultraconservative czarist regime, uh, once more for his
services, you know, to the regime and aristocracies, uh,
of Europe. Uh, AND in terms of the kind
of thrust. Uh, OF what they're talking about. There's
no doubt a hugely anti-egalitarian, uh, quality to it.
Uh, Burke, for example, is very expressive about this
when he's criticizing the idea of the rights of
man. Uh, YOU know, Burke denies that there are
such a thing as the rights of man, particularly
this idea that all people are entitled to equal
rights. He says, people are entitled to the rights
they get because of convention. Uh, AND convention dictates
that some people are gonna get more rights than
others. The example that he gives a reflection on
the revolution in, uh, France very clearly are political
rights, right? Uh, SOME people are entitled to political
rights and to be citizens and to actually have
a say in how they are governed. Uh, OTHER
people, and he singles out barbers of all people
and other lower orders of people, uh, they don't
need political rights and they shouldn't have them because
they're only going to use them. To try to
vote for restrictions on property or the redistribution of
property, uh, or more agency for themselves. And he
doesn't want that, right? So these are very much
works that are intended to entrench kinds of class
rule. But I just wanted to add that earlier
comment because they're not thoughtless kind of defenses of
class rule. They're, these are intelligent and interesting men.
And I think that sometimes leftists and liberals, uh.
Don't appreciate the creative dimensions of conservative thought. And
one of the reasons that De Maestra and Burke
were creative was precisely, uh, you actually don't see
this in a lot of conservatives any longer, uh,
because they came out of a lot of the
same environments as the revolutionaries themselves. It's kind of
a lower striving orders and reached very different conclusions
to the revolutionaries that they would eventually criticize.
OK, so let me ask you now more about
the American modern era and American contemporary society and
politics. I mean, how has anti-intellectualism manifested in more
recent times? In America, and do you think that
America is particularly anti-intellectual when compared to other countries,
or is this a phenomenon that we see across
the board?
I don't think America is particularly anti-intellectual when compared
to other countries, um, at least if you're talking
about in a cliche sense, you know, um. Europeans
and even Canadians, I should add, I'm from Canada,
I will sometimes have this whole, um, you know,
Americans are stupid, and, you know, all they do
is watch Fox News and drink six packs and
watch football and that's all they care about. I
don't, I don't think that's true, right? Uh, I
mean, uh, if you look at, um, the late
20th century, in particular, when you had figures like
Lionel Trilling and William F. Buckley, uh, and, you
know, even, uh, socialists like Michael Harrington, uh, occupy.
POSITIONS of preeminence in the American, um, public discourse.
And these are pretty impressive intellectuals, right? We're not
talking about, you know, Heidegger or Rawls here, but,
you know, they were very educated, knowledgeable, thoughtful people.
Um, BUT I think definitely now, there's no doubt
that American conservatism, uh, has leaned very heavily into
anti-intellectual impulses that have always been latent within it,
right? Um, SO, I'll give a couple of examples
of this, right? But much like, um, their contemporary
or their counterparts, uh, in Europe, many American conservatives
have long been extremely wary, uh, of what an
excessive intellectualism, uh, is going to do to American
society, uh, and the way that inspires, uh, previously
lower orders to start to think of themselves, uh,
less as docile subjects or, um, Docile, um, you
know, uh, beneficiaries of the existing social order, and
more like active citizens who are entitled, uh, to
change things. Uh, AND, you know, just to give
two contemporary examples. Uh, YOU know, Donald Trump, of
course, when, um, he was first running for office,
used to say that he loved the less educated,
right? Um, THAT'S kind of this populist gesture, but
it's also revealing, right? That isn't, he didn't sit
there and say, uh, I love blue-collar workers, uh,
or I love the working class. It was the
less. Educated, that he loved, right? Uh, OR more
recently, JD Vance, uh, who himself is a very
educated man, you know, went to Yale, uh, spends
a lot of time imbibing the stranger, uh, forms
of right-wing philosophy that are online right now. Uh,
YOU know, he said that professors are the enemy,
uh, much the way that Nixon used to, right?
Uh, AND argue that, you know, the university system
is breeding radicals who spread their ideas across the
country. Uh, AND we need to put a stop
to that. So, Again, this isn't, you know, some
conspiracy theory.
I mean, and it doesn't stop at academia and
university, right, because sometimes they even make claims about
ideas that supposedly children are being indoctrinated with at
school. I mean, a few years ago they were
obsessed, for example, with critical race theory supposedly being
taught at elementary school or something like that.
Oh, absolutely, right. And that was largely propagated by
um a kind of quasi-intellectual, uh, more of an
institution man called Chris Ruffo, right, uh, who was
very overt about why he was doing that on
Twitter, uh, where I said, you know, look, uh,
we're just going to use critical race theory as
a convenient label for all kinds of things that
we don't like related back to the push for
race. QUALITY. Uh, WE'RE gonna lump them all together
under this label, constantly, you know, market it as
a bad thing, uh, and eventually drive its popularity
down. Uh, AND sure enough, that's exactly what he
ended up doing, right? Uh, AND to your point,
right, Ruffo is uh very, very, very insistent that
Professors and academics and left-wing intellectuals and the broader
liberal media generally, uh, are the enemy. Uh, AND
he sees politics is largely downstream of culture and
thinks that, uh, liberal intellectuals, uh, kind of dominate
and artists, etc. KIND of dominate the culture right
now, uh, which is why we need to check
their power and their influence and replace them with
uh more dogmatic, kind of conservative mouthpieces, right? Uh,
BUT what I kind of point out in this
article, uh, is again, what's interesting is that, um,
This kind of uh insistence on anti-intellectualism has itself
been theorized pretty pointedly uh by many conservative intellectuals
in the United States. Uh, AND they offer reasons
for why they think that everyone would be better
off if, um, most intellectuals just kind of shut
up, uh, and people kind of understood the role
they're meant to play and didn't think too much
about it. Uh, JUST to give two examples, um,
we'll start with William F. Buckley, right? William F.
Buckley, for your listeners who don't know, uh, is
one of the kind of major architects of the
modern conservative movement, uh, founded National Review in the
1950s, was a major, uh, promoter of, uh, Barry
Goldwater's run in 1964, that kind of, uh, birthed
the political conservative movement. Uh, AND in his, uh,
early book, God a Man at Yale, uh, Buckley
is very, very, very, very critical. Uh, OF the
kind of liberal education that he saw himself as
getting, uh, at Yale, right, uh, as an undergraduate
student. Uh, AND he talks about how he was
taught socialism and Keynesianism, uh, and anti-Christianity, and he
doesn't like any of that, right? Uh, HE characterized
it as, uh, I don't know if you don't
remember if he used this term, but kind of
brainwashing, right? Uh, BUT what's interesting is that you
might think from reading that book initially, uh, that
Buckley's solution to this would be, OK, well, we
should teach differing perspectives, right? Uh, TO file the
National Review to kind of make sure that conservatives
are able to put their two cents into the
public discourse. But that's not the solution that Buckley
came up with, right? Uh, ACTUALLY, what Buckley said
is he said, don't anyone mistake what I'm talking
about and got a man at Yale as an
argument for academic freedom, uh, and free academic expression,
right? Uh, I don't think that academics should be
free to propagate any ideas that they want or
to teach just any ideas. Uh, HE says, I
am for academic indoctrination. But I'm just for academic
indoctrination from a conservative standpoint because our ideas happen
to be the true one, and people should be
taught the quote-unquote true ideas rather than the false
ideas that are currently being spread in American academia.
Uh, SO this is quite a shocking move if
you think about it, right? Uh, Buckley isn't even
pretending, uh, the way that some liberal academics might
pretend, uh, to care about free inquiry, presenting all
sides of the argument, right? Kind of understanding what
the opposition has to say. Uh. In fact, he
says, you know, we're not even gonna grant them
the dignity of imagining their ideas might be true
and trying to show why they're not, right? We're
just gonna assert that conservative ideas are obviously the
right ones. Uh, AND those are the ones that
consequently should be taught and society would be better
off, uh, if they were taught, you know, by
universities and others. Uh, AND even more, uh, clear
example of this would be, uh, Wilmore Kendall's essay,
uh, on Socrates, right? Um, SO Wilmore Kendall was,
uh, again, very right wing, uh. Conservative philosopher, um,
and he wrote a quite shocking essay on Socrates.
Uh, SO, most people, most thinking people have, uh,
always held Socrates up, and I'm sure your audience
is very familiar with this, uh, as a kind
of secular saint, you know, you have Socrates, you
know, whole thing where he was willing to die
for the right to be a gadfly, uh, criticizing
Athens and Athenian dogma, uh, by trying to inspire
the Athenians to be more concerned with. Justice, beauty,
all those good things, right? OK. So, most intellectuals
over the course of Western history, uh, have also
lauded Socrates, uh, as a brave and heroic figure.
Uh, EVEN though some conservatives have been very, very
critical of modern Socrates, uh, including, I should add,
a lot of those kind of critical race theories
that you're talking about, uh, and their antecedents like
Martin Luther King. Uh, BUT what's remarkable about Kendall's
essay is he's actually willing to go all the
way on this point, uh, and say, look, Were
the Athenians right to kill Socrates? And he says,
yes, they were. Uh, WHY? Uh, BECAUSE he says
Socrates, fundamentally at his core, uh, was a woke
revolutionary, right? Uh, WHAT was he doing? He was
undermining faith in the gods of the city. He
was corrupting the youth of the city, and he
was challenging the traditions and the dogmas, uh, that
let the city run properly. And what's interesting about
Kendall is he says, Socrates isn't wrong to say
that many These are probably untrue. Uh, HE'S not,
he's not even wrong to say that Athens wasn't
a perfectly just society and that there were many
problems, uh, in the Athenian Polis. Uh, BUT the
problem is that if you're an Athenian elite, obviously,
you're going to see Socrates as a threat to
your authority. Uh, YOU'RE probably also going to recognize
that the utopia that Socrates is positing or posturing
to can never actually be. Realized, right? It's absolutely
impossible to build a truly just city, uh, to
allow open inquiry of the sort, limitless open inquiry,
that's what they're talking about. So the best thing
that the Athenian elites could do was to kill
Socrates, silence his revolution, uh, or at least nip
it in the bud, uh, and accept that, you
know, and, um, that this is going to be
not the perfect regime and not a free regime,
uh, but perhaps the best regime that human beings
are capable, uh, of establishing. Uh, UNDER the right
elite that should be in charge, right? So, Kendall,
again, is a very clear example, uh, of a
conservative American intellectual who I think quite rightly is
saying, look, we don't want too much free inquirer.
We don't want little Socrates going all around our
public, inquiring into, you know, the nature of justice
and pointing out that American society doesn't embody that
perfect justice. That's only going to undermine our, the
authority of our beloved leaders. Uh, WE can't have
that.
Mhm. So I mean, do you think that these
the recent charges, and by recent I mean over
these past 1015 years that we've seen leveled against
what tended to be called social justice warriors, and
I mean sometimes I get a little bit confused
as to if when they use the term woke
now they are referring to the same people they
just rebranded them because woke is also a very
diffuse and vague term and sometimes it seems to
me that when whenever they call someone or something
woke, it's just left wing ideas that they don't
like. I mean, sometimes they're not even radical left
ideas, they're just moderate left ideas. But anyway, but
the charges that they leveled against SJWs, feminists, Marxists,
the wokes, and even conspiracy theories like cultural. Marxism,
and I mean, by the way, AJA Woods wrote
and released very recently a fantastic book on the
cultural Marxism conspiracy theory. So I mean, do you
think that all those charges that span those different
or sometimes overlapping groups of people are part of
these anti-intellectual trends that we see within the American
right?
Oh, I think there's no doubt about it, right?
Now, in fairness to them, uh, you know, and
I'm willing to offer this olive branch, right? Um,
THERE is a certain kind of what you might
call woke ideology or woke attitude, uh, that could
be censorious, right? That could kind of silence, um,
certain kinds of inquiries and ideas. Uh, AND I
think conservatives actually gained a little bit of traction,
uh, certainly in the 2010s and the early 2020s,
uh, and positing themselves as free speech warriors, uh,
and dissidents. Kind of challenging, uh, this new kind
of hegemony. Uh, I don't think any of that
was sincere for reasons I'm going to get into.
Uh, I don't even think it was particularly convincing
on the face of it, right? Um, BUT this
is one of the reasons why I think, and
I'm happy to see that which seems to be
shift right now, uh, liberals and certainly leftists should
always be the most vigorous defenders of free speech,
and the most courageous, uh, and willing to challenge,
you know, uh, and examine all kinds of ideas,
right? Uh, AND I'm kind of, um, An old
fashioned John Stuart Mill advocate in that respect, right?
Uh, BUT to your kind of broader point, uh,
there is no doubt that they've now kind of
been much more clear, uh, about what their ambition
was, uh, which is, as Rufo said, to kind
of lump any number of dissonant streams of thought
under very easy pejorative labels, critical race theory, woke
ideology, cultural Marxism, uh, which is, you know, the
kind of point of, uh, the Woods book you
mentioned, which is a great book, yeah. Solid pitch
for that right now. Uh, AND you know, just
say, oh this is bad, all this is anti-American,
all this is dangerous, and so we should silence
it, uh, to the extent possible. So just to
give a, a couple of examples of this, right?
Uh, WE mentioned Ruffo before. Uh, Chris Ruffo has
been at the forefront with Ron DeSantiss of trying
to remake, uh, the academic curriculum, uh, in Florida.
Um, Particularly at the university level. Uh, AND one
of their goals is to banish, uh, a lot
of these streams of, uh, critical race theory, social
justice inquiry, certainly kind of a socialist forms of
argumentation and intellectual examination, uh, from the University curriculum,
uh, and marginalize or silence them, however possible, right?
Uh, AND, you know, sometimes this can actually take
very characteristic Burkian kind of, um, forms, right? So
let's talk about critical race theory. Uh, I mentioned
how Burke pointed out consistently that he thought it
was a real shame and pretty dangerous when people
inquire too deeply into the origins of political authority
because it exposes, it's all to human, uh, and
often, um, Quite disappointing, uh, kind of source. Uh,
WELL, you know, this advocacy against critical race theory
is very much in the spirit, uh, of this
kind of Burkian wariness. Uh, WHY? Uh, BECAUSE one
of the things that the critical race theorists are
very good at doing, uh, is undermining the kind
of hagiographies that Americans love to, um, particularly conservative
Americans, uh, love to identify with. Uh, ABOUT the
founding, right? You know, um, and, you know, the
United States since July 4th, right? Uh, YOU know,
the founders are presented as almost these kind of
saint-like beings, uh, or secular saints, uh, who inaugurated
a new era or a new republic of freedom
and equality, and, you know, basketball and hotdogs, you
know, uh, for the whole world. Uh, AND well,
what the critical race theorists point out is, Well,
there might be a lot of merits to the
American Republic, uh, but, you know, it's not exactly
like it was perfect, uh, because there were millions
of people who were in shackles. Uh, THERE were
vast populations of people on the American continent, uh,
whose land was going to be seized from them,
and they were going to be displaced and driven
out west and eventually killed through horrific genocides. Uh,
AND all of this is continuous, uh sorry, continuing
to have a very negative effect on, uh, many
people in the country. I think about indigenous peoples
or Latin people. Or, um, of course, African Americans,
right? Uh, AND so by drawing attention to the
deep flaws, uh, that were latent in the country
at its origin, you know, critical race theorists undermine,
um, not quite the legitimacy of the American state,
but certainly the kind of sacred imagery that people
like to associate with the American state and institutions,
uh, as part of their calls for saying we
need to reform things, we need to kind of
do better. Uh, YOU saw a very good example
of this with uh Zora Adani's speech about July
4th, uh, just the other day, right? Uh, AND
so this Push against critical race theory, uh, is
very much again, in this kind of Burkian vein,
uh, trying to say, look, we do not want
people undermining, uh, the fanciful stories that we tell,
uh, about how great the country was from its
founding, how it's never really done anything particularly badly,
bad, uh, and consequently, you know, implying that existing
institutions and existing inequalities aren't legitimate and moral in
some way, shape or form. Uh, AND it's very
telling that most of the critics of critical race
theory, very, very obviously have not engaged with them
in any. Substantial way, right? Um, Chris Ruffo is
a bit of an exception to that. I read
his book and he at least has kind of
read, uh, glanced at some of the critical race
literature, but most of them, you know, uh, haven't
even picked up Martin Luther King, let alone Derek
Bell or Kimberly Crenshaw. Let's just put it this
way, right? Uh, BUT it's this instinct to say
we just don't want people talking about that. Uh,
THAT'S where the anti-intellectualism lies. Uh, OR to give
one other example that I think is hilarious, uh,
that kind of speaks to the Kendall point, uh,
about Socrates. Uh, A professor was recently told. And
Greg Abbott's, Texas, that he wasn't allowed to teach
the symposium by Plato. Uh, AND he eventually left,
uh, the university that I was working at. Uh,
AND that's because, uh, he was told that the
symposium deals with stuff like gender ideology and gender
fluidity. Uh, AND even though Plato is part of
the canon, Abbott and the other conservatives, uh, that
run, uh, Texas public universities don't want students learning
about that. Uh, SO, that is obviously a A
hilarious and deeply disturbing example, uh, that shows you,
even Plato is on the chopping block now, uh,
since Plato, for all he has certain kind of
conservative tendencies, uh, was at least courageous enough and
thoughtful enough to say, sure, we should inquire into
whether or not human beings are straight or gay
or something else, uh, by nature. Uh, IT is
worth examining the roots of what we think about
gender, uh, and gender identity and examining whether or
not they are permanent, enduring, or flourish, or, or
fluid. A lot of conservatives don't want people thinking
too much about those kind of things cause they
might lead them in what they consider bad direction.
So, apparently, you know, the symposium is no longer
gonna be taught, uh, and, you know, Texas, uh,
any longer, at least in its public universities. Uh,
AND that is obviously an enormously, uh, disturbing example
of anti-intellectualism that's very much in the spirit with
what Kilmore, uh, Kendall was talking about when he
said we should silent Socrates and applaud the people
who killed them.
Yeah, I mean, I wanted to ask you more
specifically now about universities and university campuses because we
hear many times nowadays from conservatives that, I mean,
liberals and left wingers at university are really the
people who are against academic freedom because they don't
want to. Allow or supposedly as the narrative goes,
don't want to allow certain conservative ideas into academia
or to be explored there, but I mean, are
they really the conservatives? I mean really in favor
of academic freedom and a supposed political neutrality at
university campuses, because it seems to me. That, I
mean, what they really want, I mean if you
look at how they react to, for example, when
they get across on social media or elsewhere ideas
that are more prevalent on the left, like for
example ideas espoused by people from cultural and social
studies, I mean feminist studies, gender. Studies, women's studies
and all of that and Marxist scholars, I mean
then they tend to have a very negative reaction
to that, so which I mean would be a
reaction that doesn't, uh, I mean, apparently goes against
academic freedom because they don't like those kinds of
ideas explored in academia and When they tend to
have a positive reaction is when they see, for
example, academics talking about uh discredited ideas like scientific
racism, eugenics, and, and things like that. So are
they really in favor of academic freedom or are
they only in favor of the the ideas that
they like?
I mean, I think the answer is pretty clearly
the latter. Uh, AND again, I don't need, you
need to speculate. Uh, THE minute they got power,
they decide they want to censor, uh, everyone they
disagreed with, particularly on university campuses, right? Uh, AND
I'll just give a few examples of this. Uh,
AND there are many more that we could bring
up. Uh, BUT, you know, just to kind of
pay the devil their due, uh, I do agree
with some conservative critics that circa the 2010s to
the 2020s, uh, there was a tendency on the
part of uh Subset, uh, of liberal and kind
of what you want to call them woke, uh,
academics and students, uh, to not want to discuss
conservative ideas or to marginalize our silence conservative ideas.
Uh, AND I think this was a mistake, right?
Uh, I think that conservatism constitutes an interesting and
long-standing intellectual and political tradition in the Western world,
uh, and it's important for students to be exposed,
uh, to those ideas, much like I would also
insist it's important for Students to become aware of
the basics of Marxism and socialism, and liberalism, and
of course, critical race theory. Uh, YOU know, there
are limitations to this because, you know, there's only
so much time, uh, that we have. Uh, BUT
you know, you should try to present a broad
menu, uh, of ideas to students and allow them
to, um, sort to themselves. Uh, AND, you know,
I try to embody that, uh, in my own
classes. Uh, SO, I'm not opposed, uh, to some
conservatives, uh, charging with certain liberals and leftists, um.
With hypocrisy, uh, for claiming to stand for free
speech and critical thinking and radical inquiry, but not
living up to that in practice, uh, by marginalizing
or dismissing conservative ideas. Uh, THAT said, hypocrisy is
the kind of, um, Praise, uh, that vice pays
to virtue. Uh, AND it's notable that conservatives, oh
sorry, that liberals and leftists have at least always
claimed to be committed to free speech, uh, and
cherished it as an important value. Uh, AND again,
I think that things are rapidly moving back in
the direction they should be, uh, which is, you
know, where leftists and liberals are the ones who
are at the forefront, uh, of, um, defending free
speech, uh, particularly leftists, I should say, uh, when
it comes to things like, uh, Palestine. Um. You
know, in the United States and indeed elsewhere. Uh,
AND what you're seeing is conservatives being much more
honest now, uh, about what many of them have
always wanted, uh, which is to weaponize concerns about
free speech in order to gain power, uh, precisely
so that they can then Crush it when they,
uh, gain it, uh, gain power, uh, and then
institute a program of ideological indoctrination that's gonna teach
students exactly what they think they ought to be
taught. Uh, AND again, you know, this is very
much the kind of uh Buckleyan move that conservatives
have been making since the 1950s, you know, uh,
Buckley's got a man at Yale, opens by making
people really angry about how students are being indoctrinated
with leftist idea, they're not hurting the alternative side.
Conservatives like him can't, uh, Get a break. Uh,
AND then, you know, it ends with him sitting
there and being like, oh, by the way, when
we get in charge of universities again, uh, I
don't think we should teach all sides of this
argument. Uh, WE should absolutely just indoctrinate people in
my views because mine happen to be the true
ones, right? Uh, SO, I think that what you're
seeing here is, um, a kind of uh not
a realignment, but a, uh, a shift back to
The natural order of things, uh, which is conservatives,
as they always are, um, always have been, you
know, uh, espousing kind of anti-intellectual program of indoctrination,
uh, and liberals and especially leftists, rightly, uh, once
again, recognizing that we need to be at the
forefront of demanding free and open inquiry into the
basic parameters of what our society should be. Mhm.
So let's get now into your other article. Steven
Pinker doesn't know anything about Marxism, which was published
again on Current Affairs,
and co-author with Ben Burgess, I said.
Yeah, uh, and, uh, I mean, there you go
through several different claims that you heard Pinker making,
uh, particularly in the podcast with Puja Aurora and
also in books like Enlightenment Now. So, uh, let's
go through, uh, through, through some of them at
least. So, uh, you talk about What he gets
wrong, for example, about what Marx wanted society to
be. So did he, did Marx really want a
sort of a top-down regime of bureaucracy and centralized
control? I mean, is that what he really wanted,
as Pinker tends to claim.
No, uh, and it's simply wrong to imply that,
um, which isn't to say that some Marxists haven't
called for that, particularly Marxist Leninist, and obviously Stalinists,
uh, right, but to blame Marx for what his
alleged disciples did decades and centuries later, uh, I
think is the height of anti-intellectualism in its own
way, right? Uh, SO Marx wrote very, very, very
little, uh, sometimes frustratingly little about what communism or
socialism we're going to look like. Uh, AND this.
It wasn't because he wasn't interested in that. It's
because his own kind of historical materialist philosophy, uh,
precludes him from spending too much time, as he
once put it, writing recipe books for the cookshops
of the future, uh, or if you prefer more
modern terminology, blueprinting, uh, what things were going to
look like. Uh, SOMETIMES it kind of takes a
stab at speculating, uh, at what a new society
was gonna look like. Uh, BUT it's very, very,
very, very, very, uh, thin stuff, right? Uh, AND
it changes quite a bit over time. Uh, SO,
What most critics of Marx on this point, uh,
myself as well, I should add, cause I'm critical
of some aspects of this, uh, like Pinker, uh,
we usually do is look at the Communist Manifesto,
uh, and it's kind of, um, quasi vanguardist language,
uh, to say, well, you know, this goes to
show that he supported a dictatorship of the proletariat
over society and that consequently, you know, the state
was going to run everything. Uh, THAT'S a pretty
clear misunderstanding. And I think that part of the
problem lies in uh This language of, uh, you
know, the dictatorship of the proletariat or the rule
of the Workers' Party. Uh, YOU know, um, Marx
anticipated that the proletariat or the workers were going
to consist of the vast majority of people in
any society that were ripe for revolution. Uh, SO
when he says that the workers are going to
rule, that, that there's going to be a dictatorship
of the workers, what he means is that the
vast majority of people for the first time in
human history are going to be the ones that
are going to govern human. Society, uh, as an
attempt to kind of transition, uh, away from class
role. Uh, SO if you think that the vast
majority of people actually ruling society is, uh, anti-democratic,
then, uh, you know, you might actually yourself be
a bit of an anti-democrat. Uh, NOW, that said,
I think that there are serious problems with the
communist manifesto and the vision laid out in it,
uh, not least because, uh, some of the language
can be, uh, somewhat vanguarded, right, in the sense
of, uh, agitating, uh, for, you know, uh, small
elite or kind of a Malkenb to eventually kind
of uh lead the revolution, uh, and then transition
to, you know, the worker state, etc. ETC. And
I think this uh provided currency for Marxist-Leninist, uh,
to later do a lot of damage to Marxism,
uh, by instituting, uh, authoritarian states. I don't blame
Marx for that. Uh, I think it's just, you
know, was something that, um, in hindsight, we could
realize he might have been a bit more careful
on. Uh, BUT, you know, in later works like
the Civil War in France or the Critique of
the Gothic Program, uh, he himself moves. Away from
even this kind of um slightly vanguardish direction towards
envisioning a hyper-democratic, hyper decentralized state, uh, of the
sort that I personally think might be unworkable for
other reasons, but very different reasons, really. You know,
just to give an example in the civil war
in France, he suggests, look, there should be a
National Assembly that will run the country. Uh, IT'S
going to be extremely democratic in the sense that
you'll have representatives, but you can recall them at
any given point, uh, which is a shocking idea.
Right, you know, it's not we're not even talking
about elections every 2 years. Uh, WE'RE saying that,
you know, if your politician does something you're unhappy
with, immediately, you're allowed to recall them, right? Uh,
COULD be quite disruptive. Uh, AND then he suggests,
look, this National Assembly should have certain powers, uh,
granted to it to kind of run things for
France or whatever it happens to be as a
whole. Uh, BUT it shouldn't be too many powers,
right? Uh, BECAUSE by and large, he also posited
that local communes should be mostly self-governing and perhaps
even self-sufficient, uh, for pretty obvious communist reasons. Right?
He says, look, uh, hyper centralization in the hands
of this National Assembly would mean that most people
are kind of, uh, under an alien power, uh,
that's highly distant from them. Uh, AND what we
want is, you know, Bordeaux or Orleans or whatever
to have their own local communes where citizens will
actively participate, uh, in political and economic life, really
organizing political and economic life, uh, both because that'll
be less alienating and also because, um, that's what
true communism is supposed to consist of. So you
have this very Decentralized in a lot of way
vision, uh, at least in these works of what
communism or socialism would look like, right? A kind
of loose national assembly that will have some powers
for it, but a lot of power granted to
local communists that are gonna be self-governing by all
citizens, uh, which ironically is, uh, something that a
lot of conservatives call for in a superficial way,
right? You know, more local governance, less state intrusion,
uh, From the center of that kind of stuff,
right? Now, there are problems, I think with this
vision also. Uh, I think that, you know, for
instance, Marx could pay more attention to the importance
of things like liberal rights, at least in the
civil war in France, although he did elsewhere. Uh,
I think, you know, uh, there's also reasons to
be wary of to immediately recall any elected representative
that you happen to appoint to office. Like many
people, I don't like many politicians, and there's a
certain part of me that thinks, uh, good, you
know, stick it to them right away, right? Uh,
BUT I think it'd be highly disruptive if you
just have this kind of, um, National Assembly that
has consists of a constantly rotating body of members,
right? Uh, THAT don't have any kind of, um,
permanence to them, right? I think that there's value
in having elections every couple of years. If someone
does something really bad, like a crime, yeah, that
maybe recall them, right? Uh, BUT whatever else you
want to say about that. This vision looks nothing
like uh the authoritarian states that um Pinker boogeyman's
about. Really what it is, uh, following Bruno Leopold
and his, uh, seminal book, Citizen Marx, as a
kind of radical republicanism, right? Uh, HYPER-CITIZEN involvement, uh,
Very, very democratic, uh, in every kind of respect,
uh, and, um, hugely participatory, right? Uh, IN the
sense that people are supposed to be actively managing
both their political and economic life at every level,
uh, ideally.
So another thing that he likes to point out
to discredit Marxism as an ideology has to do
with the fact that he says or he claims
that Marxism has been tried and it clearly never
worked and of course we're we're already familiar with
people pointing to society. Societies or countries like the
former Soviet Union, Russia, China, Cuba, Cambodia, and all
of those countries and saying, oh look, it's been
tried, it clearly hasn't worked. Capitalism is clearly the
way to go, and so on and so forth.
But I mean, do you think it's fair to
say that Marxism has really been tried in any
society?
No, not in any kind of way. Uh, I
mean, I take particular issue with the Cuban example
whenever I see it raised, because I'm like, especially
now, and it's like, well, you know, they've also
been blockaded, uh, by the world's preeminent imperial and
military power, and which has also done everything it
possibly can to undermine, uh, the efforts to build
socialism on that island, which is an excuse, you
know, the, um, uh, human rights violations that have
been carried out by the regime, you know, I
don't have a lot of sympathy for that. I
have no sympathy for that. Uh, BUT, you know,
we should put those kinds of things in context.
Um. That said, you know, based upon what I
just mentioned moments ago, it's not even really clear
to me what they mean when they say, well,
Marxism was tried and it failed, right? Uh, YOU
know, Marx wrote a couple dozen pages over the
course of a very long intellectual career about what
communism or socialism might look like. Most of these
comments are enormously speculative. Uh, Even shall I say,
a little bit idealistic at points, and you wouldn't
like me to say that, but it's true, right?
You know, you get comments like, uh, well, under
communism, the, uh, development of human powers will be
an end in itself for the first time rather
than simply a means, uh, or, you know, uh,
under communism, the free development of each will be
a condition for the free development of all. Uh,
OR under communism, after we transition from socialism, this
is the famous formulation in the particular Gothic program,
uh, we'll move, you know, to The principle, um,
from each according to his ability to each according
to his needs, right? Now, I have a lot
of sympathy for some of these uh more philosophical
arguments, for instance, about um making the development of
human capacities or human powers and ending itself for
the first time, right? It's really not clear reading
Marx, how this is meant to be implemented. Uh,
AND again, that's in part because Marx didn't want
to write a lot of blueprints about how this
was meant to be implemented, right? Uh, HIS main
job when he got up every day and went
to the British Library to work on, uh, was
examining and criticizing capitalism. And he was very, very
good at that, right? Uh, WHY, you know, he
wrote thousands and thousands of pages criticizing capitalism, and
only a couple dozen pages speculating on what communism
and socialism would look like. Uh, AND a lot
of those are mostly directed against other communists and
socialists, right? Uh, WHO he thinks just have wrongheaded
ideas, uh, about what this is going to look
like. So, it's not even clear to me what
Marxism was implemented could possibly mean. Uh, Marxism isn't
a kind of worked out political philosophy devised by
someone like Karl Marx, uh, who said, you know,
here's my views, do this, right? Um, It's a
critique of political economy and capitalism, uh, that you
can take up in many different ways, right? Uh,
YOU know, for instance, many of the social democratic
parties of Europe that are anything but authoritarian. If
anything, they were kind of at the mainstays of
push for pushes for, um, democracy and women's suffrage,
etc. uh, WE'RE deeply inspired by Marx. Think about
the SPD, uh, in Germany or the Socialist Party
in France, uh, and, you know, They governed well
and effectively in a lot of ways. There are
certain problems, I think, with what they did, uh,
but they're not authoritarian, uh, and it's kind of
ridiculous to even kind of insinuate that. Uh, AND
then, of course, there are people who have read
Marx, uh, and his critique of capitalism in authoritarian
ways. Uh, AND I think they were wrongheaded in
doing this, you know, a good example of that,
of course, be Lenin, uh, or Mao, uh, or
Pol Pot or whoever it happens to be, uh,
who Take a lot of the kind of um
quasi vanguardist language usually that you would sometimes see
in the manifesto, uh, and use that as a
justification for their own political ambitions and Machiavellianism. Uh,
AND I think that that really was very much
uh against the spirit uh of Marx and Marxism,
uh, because, you know, Marx himself was somebody who
was very, very, very undogmatic, constantly willing to learn
from opposing points of view, uh, cherished, uh, rights
like freedom of. Expression. Uh, THIS is what I
mentioned when it's like, when I pointed out that
it's not like he was opposed to liberal rights
in all respects. If anything, Marx was, um, from
his very early career, uh, one of the most
militant advocates for freedom of the press, for the
very sensible reason that Marx himself was a, uh,
intellectual, uh, and often a journalist who was censored
constantly by the states of Europe. Uh, SO he
very much treasured the right to kind of for
socialists to, uh, kind of advocate for their positions
without being censored by reactionaries. So, Just so much
of what Pinker says and insinuates, uh, in that
book and in that interview are wrong. Uh, BUT
I think it's wrong in an interesting way, uh,
and it's wrong in an interesting way for the
reasons that we mentioned in the conclusion of our
article. I think the only reason that people are
allowed to get away with this, uh, in the
year of our Lord 2026, uh, is central. Just
liberals, center-right liberals, so the sort like Steven Pinker,
I've just been allowed to get away with saying
really, really shallow things about Marxism for a long
time, uh, to, you know, applause, uh, from, you
know, the pundit crowd, uh, and from, you know,
people who just are opposed to socialism, uh, you
know, in their bones. Uh, AND I think, you
know, uh, if you want to criticize Marx and
socialism, by all means do so, right? That's one
of the virtues of freedom of expression, you should
be allowed to do so. But for God's sakes,
can't we just actually get quality critiques for a
change, rather than this kind of, um, very vanilla
reheated Reaganite cliches that are just rolled out, uh,
50 years after, you know, their peak, uh, for
the 10 trillionth time to, you know, applause by
people who've probably never picked up Dos Koppan all
in their life.
Yeah, yeah, I mean, when it comes to Steven
Pinker's view of the Enlightenment, I, I mean at
this point I find it really tiring, boring, and,
and I mean looking at how he approaches the
Enlightenment historically and philosophically, at best I think it's
a very simplistic and surface level reading or understanding
of the Enlightenment. And at worst it's actually historically
and philosophically ignorant in the sense that I mean
in the Enlightenment now and also in the better
angels of our nature, he seems to always try
to cherry pick which authors, which intellectuals, which philosophers,
scholars are real Enlightenment figures and which aren't, and
I I mean, conveniently enough, the ones that align
with the ideas that he likes tend to be
the real Enlightenment figures, and the ones which don't
align with his ideas tend to not be Enlightenment
figures or even be anti-Enlightenment figures. But I mean,
of course, feel free to comment on what I've
just said.
I would actually like to weigh in on that,
right, because Sometimes he's been criticized for this, even
by sympathetic audiences, which we mentioned, uh, in our
article, right? Uh, SO, you know, the center-right magazine
Quillette, uh, which I've written for and Ben has
written for largely to espouse left-wing views and criticize
some of the um bad takes on left-wing views
in the, uh, you know, This is not a
magazine that in any way, shape or form be
described as sympathetic to Marxism. Uh, YOU know, most
of them would think that John Rawls is beyond
the pale, right? Uh, BUT, you know, even they
put to Pinker, uh, in their interview, uh, on
enlightenment. What could Marx be characterized as an enlightenment
figure, right? You know, he was very much gleaned
or raised in, you know, tradition of Western thought,
you know, synthesizing German philosophy, French radicalism, and English
political economy, constantly described what he was doing is
trying. To gain a scientific understanding of the world.
Uh, AND, you know, he argued in many cases
that, you know, the transition to communism and socialism,
uh, would mean the transition to a more rational
and better ordered society of the sort that enlightenment
philosophers have always advocated for. Uh, AND Pinker, to
your point, just completely waffles on this, saying, well,
you know, this isn't meant to be a book
about the history of Enlightenment and who counts as
an Enlightenment thinker, etc. ETC. Really, what I'm just
doing is espousing certain kinds of principles, uh, that
I think are going to To make the world
go better. Uh, WELL, if that's the case, then
don't try to claim the mantle of enlightenment for
yourself. The Enlightenment was a very complicated movement that
had many diverse and interesting and sometimes, let's be
honest, quite weird strains. Uh, SOME of them, you
know, uh, I personally have a lot of admiration
for, like liberalism, like socialism, etc. uh, OTHERS of
which I find, um, somewhat less laudatory, particularly a
lot of the, uh, ethno-chauvinism, uh, and later moves
towards. Scientific, quote pseudo-scientific racism, etc. ETC. You know,
I don't have time for a lot of that
kind of stuff, uh, cause I think it's just
all hogwash, uh, you know, but this kind of
rote dismissal, uh, of the complexity of the Enlightenment,
and you have to kind of boil it down
to, um, what an upper middle class, uh, Well-heeled
professor, uh, thinks that the world ought to do,
uh, it's just really reductive, uh, and, again, anti-intellectual
in a certain kind of way.
Yeah, yeah. So I, I, I mean, in that
sense, when he says or claims that Marx is
an anti-enlightenment figure, I mean that that doesn't make
any sense.
Well, he doesn't quite claim that Marx is an
anti-Enlightenment figure. I mean, Per's smart enough to know
that that would be a problematic claim to make.
He just decides not to kind of draw attention
to that, right? Again, when he's pushed on this
by a sympathetic audience, he's just kind of like,
well, No, I'm not here to sit there and
say, who is an Enlightenment thinker, who counts as
part of the Enlightenment or not. I'm just kind
of espousing my own views. But I think that
that's quite insincere, right? Because he's clearly claiming the
prestige and legitimacy of the Enlightenment, uh, for his
own center right project. Uh, AND if that's the
case, then he owes it to his audience to
explain why other strains of enlightenment thought that he's
extremely dismissive of without apparently being all that knowledgeable
of like Marxism, uh, don't count, uh, or shouldn't
be considered. Yeah, he, he,
he was, he was the same with the figures
like N Nietzsche. I mean, he has a very,
a very surface, surface level reading of N Nietzsche.
Yeah, absolutely. Right now, I mean, I want to
be clear, I think that Nietzsche is an anti-enlightenment
figure. Uh, I think he's a brilliant philosopher, right?
And I, I don't mean that as a pejorative,
right? I personally disagree with him about a lot
of things. Uh, BUT there's immense amounts that you
can learn from Nietzsche. But this kind of superficial
way of dealing. Uh, WITH seminal figures in the
history of Western thought, uh, is deeply disrespectful. And
I also think has not served the project of
the Enlightenment well, uh, because if there's one thing
the Enlightenment is supposed to stand for, it's supposed
to be reasoned argumentation. Uh, AND part of reasoned
argumentation is not creating figures, seminal figures like Marx,
Nietzsche, whoever it happens to be cursorily, but actually
dealing with their work in depth, trying to understand
their perspective, recognizing their merits and their merits. And
that's just not something somebody like Piger, um, Piner
has time for.
Mhm, YEAH, yeah, I, I mean, I think that
Pininker has larger issues. We're talking mostly about political
ideology here and I mean, I guess a little
bit of philosophy and history if we're talking about
the Enlightenment. But I think that he has larger
issues, particularly in the way he explores history, anthropology,
politics, and economics in the better angels of our
nature and enlightenment now, because it seems that he
tends to follow very specific intellectual trends when it
comes to how We should, uh, look at, for
example, uh, the trends in violence across history, uh,
violence in, um, prehistoric or traditional societies, and then
again, his views on, uh, Marxism, more socialism versus
capitalism and all of that. I, I mean, he,
he, he's a great cognitive psychology. Linguists and so
on, but when it comes to history, anthropology, politics,
and economics specifically, he, he tends or he seems
to be very superficial in his analysis.
Oh, without a doubt, right now, so look, I
have no problem with people trying to engage in
interdisciplinary or transdisciplinary work. Um, SOME figures can be
really quite talented at that, right? Think about something
like uh Noam. YOU know, uh, back in the
day, or Nietzsche, right? You know, Nietzsche began as
a philologist, and obviously, he's most well known for,
um, his contributions to philosophy now, or, Marx, you
know, Marx began as a philosopher and uh made
seminal contributions to every discipline under the sun, right?
Uh, BUT the thing is, if you're going to
try to comment on these things, then it is
incumbent on you and it shows respect to your
readers to actually know something about them, uh, to
engage thoroughly with all. Alternative points of view, uh,
and to try to understand them prior to criticizing
them, right? And I should add that that is
part of this Enlightenment heritage that Pinker claims to
espouse and to embody, right? And that's just not
what he does. And he is not interested in
actually looking seriously into any of these traditions, understanding
them, criticizing them in any kind of meaningful way.
Uh, Most of it is just rote dismissal. Uh,
AND, um. Coupled with, you know, a kind of
a pooh poo, powdery attitude, right? Uh, NOW, in
fairness, uh, again, I agree with you that I
think he's a great cognitive psychologist. Uh, I wrote
a review of his book, um, Rationality Now for
Art Digital, a long time ago, um, where, you
know, he talks about people's inherent biases and the
way that people tend to reason about, um, various
issues. It's very interesting, right? Um, I couldn't comment
on it much methodologically, uh, or scientifically, because that's
not my wheelhouse, right? But I certainly learned a
lot from it. And I thought it's a very
good book, and I've recommended before. Uh, BUT I
think that when you contrast the quality of rationality
now to enlightenment now or any of his other
contributor like uh contributions to politics and economics, uh,
the distinction is very, very, very clear, right? Um,
AND it's not because he's not smart enough to
Write about Nietzsche or Marx thoughtfully or the history
of Western thought thoughtfully. Uh, I just don't think
he cares all that much. Uh, BUT if that's
the case, then maybe don't do that. Uh, OR
if you're going to do it, at least preface
what you say by being like, look, I don't
know shit about this. Uh, SO take everything I
say with a gigantic grain of salt.
Yeah, so I, I have just one last question
and leaving Pinker aside for a second, uh, who
do, who do you think have been the best
critics of Marxism and the ones that Marxists should
contend with the most?
Yeah, that's a really good question, uh. Give me
a second. I think Pierros Rafa, uh, the seminal,
uh, economist, launched a very or developed a very,
very powerful and potent critique of, uh, at least
some versions, uh, of the labor theory of value,
uh, particularly criticizing, uh, the idea that labor has
special properties, uh, because only it can really, um,
produce value in and of itself, right? Uh, IN
itself is not produced by anything anterior to it.
Uh. Straffo criticizes this by pointing out, uh, it
kind of uh misconstrues, uh, the inputs that are
required in order to create the laborer who can
then labor, right? Uh, FOR instance, corn, uh, for
example, uh, and it's a very technical point, but
what Strafa argues is, uh, look, uh, once you
kind of recognize that it requires more than labor
to make a laborer, uh, you require inputs from
things like corn, amongst other things, and water, etc.
ETC. It kind of, uh, dissolves a lot of
the special properties that some Marxists, uh, can ascribe
to labor, again, following, uh, Ricardo. Uh, AND Rafa
is notable in uh being pretty deeply knowledgeable, uh,
of the Marxist tradition, right? He was friends with
Antonio Bramsci. Uh, HE'S also quite sympathetic to other
aspects of Marxism and socialism. Uh, BUT, you know,
you don't need to take my word for it.
Uh, David Harvey in his recent book on Marx,
uh, singles Rafa out, uh, for praise, pointing out,
look, you know, You don't have to agree with
everything that he says as a criticism of Marx
to recognize that you're dealing with somebody who's got
a much more deep and probing analysis uh of
the subject matter than uh most people. Uh, IN
terms of another figure, let me think, um, I
would say Roger Scruton. Uh, Roger Scruton, uh, was
quite knowledgeable of Marx and the Marxist tradition. Uh,
HE'S also quite, uh, familiar with leftist critical theory
more generally, certainly more than almost any other contemporary
conservative I can think of. Uh, YOU can read
his book, Fools, Frauds, and Friarbrands. Uh, HE'S also
quite sympathetic to Marx on various points, right? Uh,
FOR instance, he points out alienation is real. Uh,
AND Scruton points out, look, we need to recognize
that if you're a conservative who genuinely does believe
in preserving traditions, uh, capital. Capitalism can be a
revolutionary mode of production in the way that Marx
talked about, uh, which will disrupt, uh, a lot
of those traditions. Uh, BUT scrutiny is very critical
of Marx from a kind of right gellian standpoint,
uh, appropriately enough, you know, given Marx's own, um,
origins, uh, as a left galleon before transitioning to
being a materialist. Uh, AND, you know, uh, Scruton
points out that what Marxists and socialists sometimes misunderstand
by the emphasis on materialism is, um, the spiritual
dimensions, uh, of life. Uh, AND Scruton points out,
look, You could potentially even design a better society.
Uh, BUT a lot of those spiritual dimensions of
life are not going to go away because, um,
not only are they rooted in human instincts, but
they're part and parcel of the human condition. Uh,
SINCE even if you lived in the best possible
society, we're all going to die, uh, which is
going to raise existential questions for us about the
Meaning of life, the meaning of existence, etc. Uh,
NOW, in fairness, I think that Scruden often overstates
his case against Marx and Marxism, uh, because I
do think that Marx has interesting things to say,
uh, about religion. Uh, AND I definitely think that
many Marxists, including, uh, Christian Marxists, have tried to
answer these kinds of objections. Uh, BUT he's not
wrong, uh, in insinuating, uh, that a lot of
leftists who are inspired by cliched, uh, understand the
good Marx, you know, just dismissing, uh, religion as
the opiate of the masses, uh, will sometimes lean
in on, uh, dismissing, uh, the kind of spiritual
needs of individuals, uh, and consequently undermining, uh, you
know, the, um, legitimacy, uh, I should say of
leftism in many eyes. So Scruton is a thoughtful
critic of, um, the left generally, Marx in particular.
Yeah, I mean, let me just ask you about
three specific names, not, not because I have anything
really substantive to say about them. I mean, particularly
because one of them, I'm not really that familiar
with these later, later phases where perhaps he criticized
Marxism a little bit more, and the other 21
of them I'm not familiar with his work at
all, and the other one, I'm, uh, my familiarity
with is. Very, very, very little, uh, but I
mean, I, I have Marxist friends who are, uh,
perhaps, um, much more knowledgeable about, uh, Marxist and
anti-Marxist literature, and they told me that, uh, 3
people that Marxists have to contend with is uh
Foucault, Anna Herron, and Carl Schmidt. I mean, do
you agree with that, or?
Yeah, absolutely, I mean, um. So much to say
about all three of those figures, right? Uh, SO
Foucault had a very complicated relationship with Marxism, right?
Uh, AT points, he could be extremely dismissive of
it, uh, particularly the, uh, the kind of mechanistic,
uh, Enlightenment versions of Marxism, uh, that he saw
as being particularly popular in, uh, the 1960s in
France. Uh, HE sometimes, uh, dismissed it as a
19th century economics in the bad sense, right, with
nothing to teach 20th century. On the other hand,
you know, on other points, Mark, uh, Foucault could
be, um, quite overt about his own debt to
Marx and Marxism, right? Um, I mean, uh, many
people characterize discicipline and punish, uh, for example, which
is probably His most well-known book as fundamentally materialist
work, right? Uh, IN the sense that it argues
that, uh, the contemporary carel apparatus that's emerged, uh,
in many states, uh, owes a lot to the
rise of modern bourgeois ideology, uh, or bourgeois discourse,
uh, and of course, capitalism, right? And the need
to kind of, uh, discipline the labor force. And,
you know, Foucault was very overt about the debt
to uh a kind of strain of Marxism, uh,
in that work. Uh, IN terms of Iran, um,
Iran had a very complicated, uh, relationship with Marxism.
Uh, JUST to give two examples, uh, her work,
the human condition, can be understood in many senses,
um, as a critique, uh, of Marx's emphasis on
labor, uh, as central to human nature. Uh, AND
of course, um, emancipating labor as a precondition for
human emancipation, right? Uh, NOW, I think that her
understanding of Marxism is, um, One dimensional, uh, in
this book. I don't think she really appreciates, um,
how, uh, for Mark's part of, you know, the
goal, uh, of, um, emancipating humanity, uh, was emancipating
them from the need, uh, to labor, uh, as
a kind of primary feature, um, of our life,
our primary characteristic of human life, right? Uh, HE
really has this kind of Aristotelian, uh, ethic, I
think, uh, underpinning this work. That's about the development
of different kinds of capacities. Um, THAT said, you
know, there is no doubt that there's a kind
of Marxism, uh, that Iran is taking aim at
that I think she hits. Accurately. Uh, BUT on
the other hand, if you read her book on
revolution, uh, she pointed out that Marx was a
brilliant political analyst, uh, who often was working at
a far higher level than his critics, uh, which
I always found funny because she's absolutely right about
that. Uh, AND she also expresses quite a lot
of sympathy for things like council democracy, right? Um,
SHOCKINGLY, right? Uh, YOU know, says, you know, the
Marxists might actually have a point on this. So
again, Careful critic of Marx. Uh, IN terms of
Carl Schmidt, right, uh, you know, Schmidt is, um,
A difficult thinker, right? Uh, IN part because he
moves in a very different kind of horizon, uh,
than the other two, because, um, Schmidt is very
much, uh, an irrationalist, uh, in many respects for
all the kind of, um, steely realism that sometimes,
uh, perceived to underpin his work. Uh, WHEN he
was discussing Marx and Marxism, he wasn't afraid to
characterize, um, It is basically a myth, uh, but
not in a pejorative sense, right? You know, there's
this myth that, you know, the contradictions of capitalism
are eventually going to lead the working class to
expropriate the expropriators, uh, and build the utopian society.
Uh, AND, you know, Schmidt often could express a
kind of, um, Begrudging but real admiration for the
mythological power uh of this idea, uh, that a
lot of conservatives and I'm even reactionaries, uh, aren't
willing to appreciate, right? Cause he says, look, it
changed the world. There's no doubt about it, right?
It wouldn't have changed the world unless it tapped
into something latent in human nature. Uh, AND Schmidt
is also willing to admire Marx and Marxism, uh,
for understanding, um, what we now call the agonistic
dimensions of politics, right? Uh, IT was very critical
of liberals who could imagine or who imagine that,
you know, you can. Undo politics or get away
from politics through uh parliamentary talk, uh, and rights.
You know, he said the Marxists at least appreciate
that politics is a contact sport, right? That the
ruling class is oppressing the working class and the
working class needs to seize the means of abduction,
seize the state in order to win power. Uh,
SO they're less naive than a lot of liberals.
Uh, THAT said, right, um, he also was very
clear that, you know, when Marx and Marxism and
socialists, uh, talk about, uh, Society is eventually being
governed by a rational, um, set of ideas, uh,
or suggest that Marxism is a science of history.
That's all kind of balderdash. It's a myth, the
same as most political, um. Ideas, right? Um, AND
you know, the question isn't whether or not it's
scientific or not, but whether or not it's myths,
uh, resonate. Uh, AND, you know, Schmidt was also
very critical, and I think he's quite insightful here,
uh, by pointing out that the Marxists are actually
less different than the liberals than they imagine, uh,
because even though the Marxists understand that class conflict
is a motor for human society, uh, like liberals,
they too dream of a world without politics, right?
Uh, YOU know, world where Politics is overcome by
the scientific management of society, where alienation disappears, uh,
you know, where there's full harmony and where, um,
yeah, you book this quote, uh, your free development
is a precondition for my free development, so there's
no more conflict between us. Uh, Schmidt imagined that
this was just unbearably naive, uh, cause it shared
a kind of enlightenment optimism, uh, with liberalism, right?
Cause liberals also are dream of a world without
politics. Uh, AND so, I think that, you know,
in this respect, Schmidt is actually quite right, uh,
to highlight, and, you know, this is my work
on liberal socialism as about, uh, that there's a
deep elective affinity on this point between Marxism and
liberalism, uh, and he juxtaposed his own, um, irrationalist
theological decisionism against both of them. Uh, I think
quite correctly, even if, um, I have profound moral
disagreements with what Schmidt was aiming for, obviously.
Yeah, so then you agree that those three figures
should also be contented with, I mean, if someone
is a Marxist, at least when it comes to
refining their own ideas about Marxism.
Oh, without a doubt, right? I mean, um, particularly
Hannah Rand has been a very generative sparring partner
for a lot of Marxists, uh, in no small
part because that book, The Human Condition, engages quite
deeply, uh, with some core instincts that Marxist, uh,
certainly mid-century Marxist held to, uh, you know, this
emphasis on labor is the kind of characteristic human
activity or even characteristic human essence, right? Um, SO,
um, there's really no world, uh, in which you
pick up their books and go through them, uh,
where, Even if you remain a committed Marxist at
the end, which I think you should, uh, you're
not going to gain something, uh, from deep disagreement
with these kind of figures. They're smart people, they're
worth reading.
Mhm. Great. So, Doctor McManus, uh, thank you so
much again for taking the time to come on
the show. I mean, I will also be leaving
the links to your, uh, pieces in the description
of the interview. And would you like just to
tell people where they can find you and your
work on the internet?
Sure, uh, you can add me on X, uh,
at Matt Paul Prof, um, same thing, uh, on
Blue Sky, uh, or you can just send me
an email, uh, Matt McManus 300@gmail.com. Um, I do
my best to respond to emails. Uh, JUST keep
them relatively short if you can, right? Uh, BECAUSE,
you know, sometimes people send me like these 4
page behemoths, and I'm like, oh boy, I definitely
can't respond to all that.
Yeah, no, thank you so much again for doing
this. It's always a big pleasure to talk with
you.
Yeah, you too, buddy. Take care of yourself.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyani Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Jr. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank, Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.